# Checkmate - The Gambit companion

Checkmate is a tool to perform mutation analysis of your Solidity codebase. It
tests the mutants generated by [Gambit](https://github.com/Certora/gambit).
Checkmate is capable of automatically generating the `gambit_config.json`
files, generating the mutants with Gambit's `mutate` command and testing the
generated mutations. The goal of Checkmate is to provide a hands-off experience
for security researchers and developers to run a single command, go do something
else and come back to see the analysis results.

### Pre-requisites

- You must have [Go >=1.23](https://go.dev/dl/) installed.
- You must have Certora's [Gambit](https://github.com/Certora/gambit) installed.
- You must have something to manage your local solidity compiler version. For
  example [solc-select](https://github.com/crytic/solc-select) from Trail of
  Bits.

### Install, upgrade or remove `checkmate` from your system

#### Using `go install`

You can use the go's toolchain to install `checkmate`. Install it with:
```shell
go install github.com/ChmielewskiKamil/checkmate@latest
```

#### Building from source

Review the content of this repo, clone it and run `go build`.

#### Upgrading your current version of `checkmate`

Check your version with:
```shell
checkmate --version
```

Upgrade with:
```shell
go install github.com/ChmielewskiKamil/checkmate@latest
```

#### Uninstalling `checkmate`

Removing `checkmate` from your OS is similar to other standalone Go binaries.

##### Linux/MacOS

List files to confirm `checkmate` is in the default location for Go binaries.

```shell
ls $HOME/go/bin
```

```shell
rm $HOME/go/bin/checkmate
```

##### Windows
List files to confirm 'checkmate.exe' is in the default location for Go
binaries.

```shell
dir %USERPROFILE%\go\bin 
```

```shell
del %USERPROFILE%\go\bin\checkmate.exe
```

### Usage

Navigate to the project that you want to analyze. 

The usage of Checkmate is split in two stages. When you run the `checkmate`
for the first time it will generate you the `gambit_config.json` file. This is
what Gambit requires to generate the modified versions of your code (mutants).
When using Gambit alone the config generation is time consuming as you have to
configure the remappings and select the files that you want to analyze.
Checkmate is doing that for you.

Once the config is generated you can run the `checkmate` command for the second
time. This time it will see that `gambit_config.json` is ready and will attempt
to generate the mutations.

### Using a local LLM to analyze the results

The `Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct` gives superior output and is fast. On an M1
MacBook Pro with 16 GBs of RAM it is able to analyze each missing test case in
~20 seconds. 

#### Other tested models

- `DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B` gives decent results but is slow. It takes 
  ~40-60 seconds to analyze a missing test case. This is a thinking model so it
  also prints the thought process output. The output format is unreliable and
  relatively hard to control while the `Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct` one-shots
  each test case even without examples.
